millions unemployed are underemployed we
need a plan for them and without a plan
for them in this mid-year budget update
it's more of a marketing exercise than a
genuine attempt
to get on top of our economic challenges
okay on that issue of job seeker which
you rightly raise we won't we don't know
what's going to happen
after march and you're right the
treasurer couldn't give me any
any idea about when an announcement
might happen or whether it will go back
to 40
a day there is a lot of confusion around
what that might look like
when will labour say what it thinks the
permanent job seeker
rate should be well before the election
patricia but i think it's important to
remember
we don't even know what rate we would
inherit from the government that seems
to be an important consideration
and i think even more important than
that there's at least one more budget
between now and the election possibly a
budget and a budget update
uh and so i think it is right and
responsible that we factor in all of
those things
uh before we determine a final policy
the first mover on this needs to be the
government as katie gallagher said today
we're prepared to give the government
room to get to the right decision here
and if it's a good outcome we'll support
it
but if they continue to leave people in
the lurch if they continue to
contemplate
going back to forty dollars a day then
clearly that won't be good enough
let's see what they announced between
now and march let's see what if anything
is in the budget in may
we'll take all of that into
consideration uh before we come to a
concluded view would you accept another
extension
another three month extension of that
top upgrade
oh look no we would prefer a a permanent
rate
which is higher than 40 dollars a day if
the government
is choosing between going back to 40 a
day or a temporary
uh extension of the coronavirus payment
obviously we'd consider that and talk
about it internally and come to a view
but our preference is
uh for a permanent increase in the new
start the old new start rate of 40
a day the government now has to do that
between now and march to give people
some clarity
ideally they would have done that today
you would have heard the treasurer's
message there in relation to state
borders urging state premiers to keep
those state borders open
obviously he's his kind of economic
rebound relies on the free movement of
people in australia
confidence relies on us moving around of
me being able to visit your home state
of queensland do you
urge state premiers to keep their
borders open
despite what we're seeing as a mini mini
outbreak in sydney
well first of all patricia you're always
welcome in queensland as you know you've
got a
big following in uh in the sunshine
state
look i think the most important thing is
that state governments continue to
follow the health advice the secret to
anastasia palestine's success has been
acting on the advice in other states
as well they've made careful considered
decisions
in the best interests of their people
based on the health advice
when it comes to josh friedenberg i mean
you think it he would have learned
from the last debacle when he was
wandering up and down the press gallery
here in canberra
berating the the victorian state
government
quite out of control and breathless that
went down really badly in victoria
because people don't want to be lectured
to victorians were doing their best to
do the right thing by each other
to limit the spread of this pandemic
they don't need the treasurer lecturing
them for political purposes politicizing
it
making it a party political issue what
we want to see
is state leaders follow the health
advice making good decisions
in the interests of their people and the
best thing we can do out of canberra
whether it's the government or the
opposition is to be as supportive as
possible
when governments have taken the right
decisions for the right reasons and
where the economic cost because a
shutdown
over these next couple of months would
be devastating
to the economy well what we've seen and
what today's budget update
shows overwhelmingly is the key to
getting the economy
growing again is getting on top of the
health crisis
and today's numbers really above
anything else
are a tribute to the australian people
who who did the right thing in large
numbers
to limit the spread and that's why we're
getting this economic dividend and so
the worst possible thing for the economy
the most threatening thing for the
economy is if this thing got out of
control again
that's why we need to be careful and
considered and take the health advice
they don't need the josh freidenberg
bumbling and wandering into this again
like he did last time doing such damage
to the work that victorians in that
instance but australians more broadly
are trying to do
jim chalmers labour says that the 10 000
home care packages aren't
enough how many should the government
have announced
well the point that we've been making is
that there's a hundred thousand on the
waiting list
uh thirty thousand australians died
between being approved
for a home care package and not
receiving and receiving one thirty
thousand
died waiting effectively which is
horrific and the sector is still
suffering from the billions of dollars
that scott morrison pulled out of it as
treasurer
so the point that we're making julie
collins anthony albanese myself and
others
is that 10 000 home care packages is
better than nothing but it goes nowhere
near
repairing the damage that's been done in
recent years and it's not a
comprehensive plan
to deal with the fact that in recent
months we've had discovered
you know things like older australians
going hungry missing meals
maggots in wounds all kinds of things
uncovered by the royal commission we
need something more substantial
to respond to these serious issues so
that older australians get the care that
they need
and deserve and have earned over a
lifetime
doesn't it make sense though for the
government to wait until it has that
final report from the
aged care royal commission which of
course will will call for pretty
substantial change
if the interim report is anything to go
by well let's see if they respond
properly to it the royal commissioner's
made some interim findings
and it couldn't be any clearer that
there are issues around workforce
there are issues around staffing levels
there are issues around training
equipment a whole range of issues which
have been obvious now for some time and
have been the subject of some interim
recommendations from the royal
commission
so yeah there are some longer term uh
structural issues that will come out of
the fed
february report of the royal commission
but there's a lot of uh
there are a lot of areas that have been
crying out uh for
improvement uh in a sector which has
been damaged by scott morrison's cuts
and really exposed during this crisis as
well below
what older australians need are joel
fitzgibbon's repeated interventions on
climate change undermining unity in the
labour party
oh look i think the the surest way to do
that is to con continue to
talk about them my view is that
back benches have some capacity to make
their views known i think in advance of
our national conference in march there
will be
people expressing a view about a range
of policies that's what we're seeing
here
from my point of view i think it's
important that we
make our contributions in my case via
the shadow cabinet that's what i intend
to do
just finally you're often touted as a
future labor leader
will you rule out challenging for the
leadership uh before the next election
yes patricia i want to be the treasurer
and anthony albanese government
that's what all of my efforts are geared
towards i love working with my team
and uh and the leader uh and uh that's
my intention to keep doing that
jim chalmers thanks for joining us
thanks patricia shadow treasurer jim
chalmers there
time now for our weekly check-in with
insider's host david spears and there's
just a bit to talk about david
myetho you heard the treasure and then
the shadow
treasurer with the kind of their key
lines on all of this
what do you make of today's figures
obviously better than what we expected
look they are better than expected the
one takeout for me
here pk is the volatility i mean how
long ago was the budget it's only
10 weeks right and yet we've seen what
are pretty substantial
uh shifts they're on the upside which is
good they're better than what the budget
figures suggested
but it shows us there's the potential
here for volatility and i think the
treasurer
acknowledged as much in his interview
with you and in his comments earlier
today
the main unknowns really that they're
still facing he's listed one is china
and what further deterioration there may
be in the trade front there with china
two is the vaccine roll out and look
let's all hope that early next year it
starts to roll out and by the end of
next year most of us have got it
but the third one is the potential for
further
outbreaks and boy when you're looking at
what's happened in new south wales over
the last 48 hours you can
you can see why that is a big
uncertainty a big unknown let's hope
that this one is contained that new
south wales has done does what it's done
successfully a number of times
but we just don't know and that's why
the volatility i think
is the biggest take out here as i say on
the upside today
but there's no reason why it might not
be on the downside
at some point in the next six months or
so yeah and the treasurer's message
there when i
asked him the obvious question about
state borders and
and whether what his view is on that is
pretty consistent right
they don't the federal government is
very concerned particularly on the
economic ramifications of any borders
going back up yeah but if there's one
thing we've learned this year it's that
the treasurer and the prime minister do
not call the shots when it comes to
state border closures the premiers
wield that power and we're already
hearing
threats from wa and queensland once
again they're keeping a very close eye
on what's happening on sydney's northern
beaches
i've got no doubt uh that if we do see
the the outbreak
unable to be contained and grow further
mark mcgowan and wa
i'm sure will waste no time christmas or
no christmas
in putting up that hard border once
again so
yes that will give the commonwealth a
high degree of nervousness i'm sure
because
again if there's one thing we know you
shut those borders you stop people
moving that does have
a direct impact on economic activity
look the other part of it and labor made
this point i asked the questions of the
treasurer is there's some
i reckon some glaring emissions job
seekers one issue
that payment and how the government
settles that in the longer term or even
even shorter term beyond march and of
course then then the aged care royal
commission and recommendations from that
what's your take on
you know what their thinking is around
those issues yeah this is fascinating i
think
you know what we're seeing in the better
figures today is
arguably some vindication for the
approach so
far in tapering off job keeper and job
seeker i know
you know those actively hurt by this
will will complain but it's not
hurt the macro figures but and here's a
big bust
we still have no idea what's going to
happen when the further tapering occurs
after christmas
and then the big unknown what happens to
job seeker the unemployment benefit
beyond march does it go back to the old
rate
probably not but where does it land we
don't know what impact that has on the
economy we don't know either
i think you're right to press for some
clarity at least on the timing here
because those directly affected
really are going to become more stressed
they're going to start
holding onto every penny that they can
in fear of going back to the old rate of
a day so some clarity around the timing
of that at least and then what's going
to happen in a few months time would
certainly be important i would think
on the other measures aged care in
particular well look
we know this is going to require and the
government knows this too
a huge amount of extra spending i mean
if 10 000 additional home care places
cost 850 million dollars
uh we know there's a hundred thousand on
the wait list to tackle all of that
would be eight and a half
billion dollars using those maths now
there's room to move because the budget
bottom line's a bit better still
terrible a bit better than it was
ten weeks ago in the budget so they had
that capacity but whether they're going
to spend it all in one go to try and
tackle that wait list i thought
richard kolbeck the minister's comments
yesterday were quite interesting about
this they don't want to rush too
fast with rolling out more home care
packages he even referenced
the big bat scenario under labor you
don't want shoddy operators getting into
home care
you want to make sure it's done
carefully and that the trained workforce
is there to do this
difficult and important work in looking
after people at home rather than in
residential care so
not easy but something the government
will have to address and have to spend
big on next year
david it's been so awesome having you on
afternoon briefing throughout this year
on a thursday can we do it again next
year you bet have a great chrissy you
too
david spears they're the host of
insiders time now for business with
david
chow and david it sounds like things are
heading in the right direction with the
unemployment rate
falling slightly and the treasurer is
saying the economy is rebounding
quicker than expected how has the market
reacted to all this news
well pk the market has reacted very well
i mean with the unemployment rate always
falling it's always a good thing so it
dropped to 6.8 percent
so a step in the right direction but
still around its highest level in close
to 18 years
and as for the treasurer's budget update
the interesting point i found is that he
sees unemployment falling to
5.25 by the middle of 2024
so he reckons it will take four years
for the job market to
uh rebound back to pre-recession levels
uh
and that's incredibly fast uh because it
normally takes a decade when you look
back at the 90s and 80s recession to see
how fast it
recovers the job market now that was a
lot of juice for the currency market on
the back of those announcements so the
aussie dollar has jumped to almost
76 u.s cents that's the highest it's
been all year and it's also at a two
and a half year high the other part of
the story is that uh
investors are expecting the u.s
government to pass another stimulus bill
soon which will weaken
the u.s dollar so that is also boosting
the aussie dollar
and strong iron oil prices they're
basically at a seven and a half year
high
and as the treasurer said that has uh
basically boosted the budget position so
look we are putting our eggs in one
basket almost since 60 percent of our
iron ore goes to china so touchwood hope
the trade tensions don't get too much
worse
and as for the stock market it also got
really juiced up on the back of those
announcements
the asx 200 that jumped 78 points today
up
1.2 that's the best trading day all
month
and uh it closed at 6 757 points and the
big picture related to that
is that the asx is now higher than where
it was when the year began
so before the covet sell-off it's a
mixture of things the government
stimulus
rba cutting interest rates and all that
covert vaccine optimism
basically has got investors forgetting
about covert completely it seems
as what did well mainly the banks uh
miners like ford sku medals jumped
two percent uh at a record high pretty
much its share price almost
after pay also at a record high uh you
know the surge in online shopping during
the pandemic has really boosted buy now
pay later stocks
but what didn't do well uh travel stocks
like flight santa and web jet
down three percent especially after new
south wales recorded
that small but growing coronavirus
cluster which uh
as i guess travel investors bit nervous
also speaking of record highs
you remember that digital currency
bitcoin now it's surged to almost
22 000 us dollars the highest it's ever
been
uh but then it's incredibly volatile
because two years ago it did
crash to three and a half thousand uh us
dollars
so it could easily lose half its value
by next month so
buyableware buyer beware and thank you
for using the term juicedup
it's made my absolute day david thanks
david chow there
the victorian government has rejected a
finding by the state ombudsman
that it acted illegally when it locked
down melbourne public housing towers
without warning in july
the state's housing minister richard
nguyen says the strict measure
ultimately saved lives
it was very clear from the evidence that
this virus was running
right and and can i say also
the dr van diemann herself uh indicated
in a testimony to
the ombudsman that she was absolutely
terrified
uh about what the outcome might look
like for some of the most vulnerable
people in our community who live in
those towers
i mean we have got uh three thousand
people
were locked down across those nine
towers we've got
people who are very very severely health
compromised
and i think the call that was made was
absolutely the right call
to ensure the safety of of the residents
human rights of people are not secondary
at all
we absolutely uh have conformed with
all of our legal obligations there is no
question about that
we make no apology for saving people's
lives
the victorian ombudsman deborah glass
joins me now
welcome to the program hello patricia
you recommended that the state
government apologize to
3 000 public housing tower residents
because you say the sudden lockdown in
july breached their human rights
but as you just heard the government is
refusing to do so what do you make of
their response
they're suggesting that they should not
apologize for saving
human lives i don't think i'm not saying
they should
what i've been really clear about here
is that the apology that i'm
i'm recommending is for the immediate
lockdown which was not
made on the evidence i have on direct
public health advice
there's no doubt and i don't suggest for
a moment
otherwise that the towers needed to be
locked down but they didn't need
to be locked down without warning are
you disappointed that the government
hasn't conceded
that point i am disappointed i mean it
would have been
i think this is a really important
matter for restoring community trust
that that um that they acknowledge uh
and recognize that this was wrong
let's talk about community trust how do
you think
this case has eroded community trust
when you look at the stories that people
told us you know the experiences they
had of the lockdown
we've got three thousand people in those
towers who had
no warning whatsoever of their
freedom being completely taken away from
them you know they they suddenly found
they were surrounded by
by police they had they had some people
had no access to
to food to medication to essential
supports
uh some of them were downright
traumatized by by you know the sudden
appearance of
police on their doorstep and no
information people
there was chaos uh on the ground i mean
that that's that's what was
how it was described to us and the
stories that we were told were really
distressing
there are some very distressing stories
you found that public health officials
were under the impression
there would be a delay before the
lockdown began was there a breakdown in
communication
between those experts and the government
and not that i'm aware of the um the
evidence is pretty clear that
the health officials who met at about 11
o'clock that morning
were agreed over need to intervene in
the towers there was certainly a need
for a lockdown
they left the meeting expecting that
that lockdown would be happening
the end of the following day you know
which would have given time to prepare
you know to at least a reasonable degree
to make sure that essential
supports were in place so what we do
know
is that there was a meeting of the
crisis council of cabinet that afternoon
and the decision was plainly brought
forward
the deputy chief health officer did not
make that decision
uh and did not know who did she was
simply notified that she
needed to attend a press conference with
the premier would such a strict lockdown
have been enforced if there was an
outbreak in
in a private apartment block in a
different suburb well i mean i could
only speculate on that
you know but but um but the uh
it's just it did appear to me that this
this theater of policing you know
that that we saw with the the towers
lockdown
was based on some pretty stereotypical
assumptions about
poor people about people in public who
live in public housing
i suppose the big question to ask and i
think it's an important question is
is this also potentially a case of
institutionalized racism
i don't use that word and i don't have
evidence um
to sit behind it what we do find here
is stereotyping you know that that that
was the you know
the broad impression i had was this was
a kind of stereotypical response
there were security concerns that that
justified this well we we looked for
those
security concerns and you know broadly
the you know the
if you look at the you know the levels
of criminality uh
it's pretty comparable to the rest of
the state if the government had given a
day's notice before enforcing the
lockdown
wouldn't that have resulted in residents
at the towers getting out about and
potentially spreading the virus isn't
that sort of
the counter argument to what you've
you've said here well this is not my
um professional advice here this this is
these are the sorts of things that you
would expect public health officials to
consider
and let's bear in mind that there have
been a number of lockdowns
over many months that have affected
everybody in victoria
and they were all made with notice this
is the only time
that a lockdown was imposed with no
notice whatsoever
what are the lasting lessons for the
victorian government but potentially
governments across the country about
balancing human rights i mean human
rights are not absolute
and this is about the fundamental rights
and freedoms that many of us take
for granted where there is a a need to
limit our freedoms uh
we all get that you know we we get the
reasons behind
the lockdowns we've been subjected to
but let's get the balancing act right i
mean the
the the people of the towers also had
rights
you know they and and they they were
they had a right to be
humanely treated and that meant
considering
do we need to you know if there is no
public health reason uh to you know not
to
delay the um a lockdown to allow for
the effects of that to be mitigated well
that should happen
look as you say you've heard some awful
stories
by working on this and as ombudsman
do you think some of these people have a
case to take the government to court a
class action is that potential here
that's not a matter for me i mean what
um what was important for me here
is is to shine a light on what i think
was a pretty dark
period in our recent history
and to put the evidence out there to
respond to the legitimate concerns
the multiple complaints we received from
residents of those towers
from community advocates and from people
all around victoria who were really
concerned
by what they saw and who complained to
us about it so
that's what this report is about it's
not about blaming people
but it's also about learning the lessons
for the future uh
what happens now i think it's not a
matter for me no but we have seen
the initial reaction from the state
government are you confident that those
lessons have been learned
on the basis of those answers well i i
very much hope so
um i don't know but but that's that's a
good reason to you know
to put out a report like this it puts
the the evidence into the public domain
and i think
that that kind of thing also helps to
amplify the message
and makes it more likely that lessons
will be learned should this happen again
does this demonstrate that our handle on
human rights as a community
isn't perhaps up to the level we thought
it was
i found that really disappointing and
there is a is i mean some of the
messaging
around human rights you know suggests
that that you know that we don't
that human rights are somewhat
expendable you know to the task of
saving human lives
and that is simply not true we have very
sensible human rights laws
and they work together you know human
rights are not absolute
they can be limited you know a lockdown
of itself is an entirely legitimate
thing to do if it's necessary to save
human lives that's not going to breach
our human rights laws
but let's make sure we consider human
rights and what
the evidence we had is that that
people's human rights simply wasn't
adequately considered and if it had been
with all of the information available
bearing in mind all
everything we know about the urgency of
the outbreak all the things that we've
heard the minister respond to
all of that would have been in the mix
and i think the public health the public
of advice that we had is that they would
have waited
thank you so much for joining us a
pleasure victorian ombudsman deborah
glass there
was premier mark mcgowan has warned
there is the prospect
the state's hard border with new south
wales could be reinstated
but says no decision will be made until
it's known whether there's been
significant spread of the virus a fifth
case of covert 19 has been identified on
sydney's northern beaches
and health authorities believe all five
cases are linked
a sixth case involves a driver who
transported air crew
to and from sydney airport mr mcgowan
says flights can continue arriving in
perth from new south wales today
as the number of cases currently poses a
very low risk
if we need to we'll put up a hard border
with new south wales
we won't hesitate to that to do that if
the medical advice says
that that is what is required i realize
that would be very upsetting
very upsetting for many people but if
the medical advice says
that's what we need to do to protect
western australia we will do it
and we'll do it immediately so we're
just awaiting clarity on the situation
new south wales we'll do what we have to
do
to keep having a great record in wa and
keep the health and
welfare of west australia's paramount
professor rayna mcintyre is the head of
the biosecurity
at the kirby institute and she joins me
now welcome to the program
good afternoon what's your analysis of
where this new south wales cluster is at
are you worried about the spread of the
virus
until we have vaccines and most people
are vaccinated i'll continue to be
worried because
the majority of people in in australia
are still susceptible to this virus
which means that all it takes is for
the virus to be introduced somehow and
an epidemic can take off
and because um there's transmission from
asymptomatic infected people
who don't look unwell and who don't know
that they're infected
it can spread silently as well
so do further restrictions need to be
put in place
i mean we've seen new south wales ease
restrictions and of course now there is
this
this cluster which is small but but it
is growing does it demonstrate that
perhaps we need to be at a higher alert
level
well we are going into the holiday
season and that's a really high risk
time because
people will gather together in larger
groups and more frequently than they
normally do
so that if there is some infection in
the community it's a bit
risky at this particular time of year
i don't think the the level of
in the incidence of the disease right
now warrants restrictions but we should
be thinking about
um the mode of transmission and
acknowledging that there is airborne
transmission i mean the driver of the
shuttle
was wearing a surgical mask and most of
those airport shuttles don't have
windows that can be opened
so i think we need to be looking at
things like ventilation and respiratory
protection and looking at
high-risk occupational groups which
includes people working in hotel
quarantine
and we could be doing a lot more to
address
those airborne transmission and the two
things we can do about it are masks and
ventilation
the queensland acting premier stephen
miles has warned the state could
reimpose border restrictions
uh if the outbreak outbreak isn't
contained
what would be a trigger point or a you
know sort of
logical trigger point for declaring
sydney a hot spot given we still
seem to have no consistent national
definition what the federal government
talks about is not
not what states and territories are
necessarily signed up to
i think if you're seeing continuous
growth of an epidemic over a period of
you know two to three weeks or longer
you know maybe four weeks because the
incubation period is quite long
um then you'd be concerned enough to
think that uh
you know maybe borders should be closed
i just want to ask you about the
victorian ombudsman
finding that the state government acted
illegally when it locked down
melbourne's public housing towers
without warning in july
this is really not about whether they
should have been locked down overall to
be clear
but about the pace and the warning and
the sort of consequences on human rights
that you know it could have still been
um the health consequences could have
still be managed is the argument
what's your response to that i mean was
that was that
too rushed the way that that was
executed
no i think you know everything they did
um in victoria at the time
they knew that there was an epidemic in
the community and that it was growing
and they were trying to avoid
a statewide or citywide lockdown and
trying to spare people that
so initially they tried doing testing
enhanced testing in the affected suburbs
then they tried that localized building
lockdown then they tried locking down
suburbs
and none of it worked so i think in the
bigger picture it was part of a
step-by-step strategy i don't know i
can't comment on the details and clearly
they've come up with this
um report but public health law also
allows very draconian measures
public health laws allow people to be
locked up if they're a risk to
public health um so clearly the
ombudsman's report has taken all of that
into consideration
and on the balance found that there was
um you know breach of human rights just
finally when it comes to the vaccine
roll out we know it won't be till
march and then there's a long list and a
long line
and you know it'll be a cue and of
course
uh we've got to see how we were able to
actually roll this thing out
what should our expectations be around
the vaccine roll out and the pace
well i think we should expect
that our government will do the best it
can to get the best vaccines for
australians and enough to vaccinate
most of the population obviously there
will be
limited supply initially and that's why
we've seen prioritization of
who should get the vaccine first and
that those groups have already been
defined by the government
so with the initial limited supply
they'll be
those people who vaccinated first but at
some point we will get
a full supply and at that time i think
it's
really important we have the right
vaccines i think i believe we can
achieve herd immunity through vaccines
but for that
we need vaccines with high efficacy
against prevention of any infection
and if you vaccinate enough people so if
you've got say a vaccine that's 90
effective you can vaccinate 66 of the
population
and achieve herd immunity which means
the victorian second wave type situation
can't occur
because you will stop community
transmission when you achieve herd
immunity
and that's the best way to economic
recovery professor rainer thanks for
your time
it's a pleasure professor rayna mcintyre
is the head of the biosecurity at the
kirby institute
recapping this hour's top story the
federal treasurer says australia's
economy has rebounded faster than
expected from the pandemic
and australia's unemployment rate has
decreased to 6.8
in november down from 7 in october
oceania chief economist joe masters ey
oceania chief economist joe masters
joins me now welcome to the program
great to be here the latest figures from
the abs show
around 90 000 more jobs were created in
the last month
which of course is good news what do you
make of the
of the trajectory we're on now and what
do you attribute this shift to
well the labor market and the economy
more broadly is clearly done better than
we expected
back in april and even better than we
thought back in october
uh we've seen both the october data and
the november data surprise on the upside
the unemployment rate down to 6.8 five
out of six of the jobs lost
are now back and um we're seeing that
right across the country so it's
absolutely a really good piece of data
i do think one of the big questions is
can we maintain that momentum
because some of the benefit has come
from opening of restrictions in victoria
so obviously that's sort of a one-off uh
positive impact that you get
but look the economy looks good and if
we can keep
the virus under control and we don't
have big localized lockdowns and we
would expect
that i'd market to continue to improve
it's a good news story yeah but it's
also marked by a lot of volatility right
i mean it's a very
volatile picture it was only 10 weeks
ago that we saw the budget delivered as
my colleague david spears was saying and
now
we've got this turnaround does it also
demonstrate that
you know we can't really rely very much
on any
to be to be really frank on some of
these projections because things can
change so quickly
look i think to be fair uh forecasting
in this environment is just incredibly
difficult the magnitude of how quickly
the economy is moving
means that the numbers are enormous you
know 90 000 jobs in a month so
for that to get to revise by 10 20 even
30 000
is is within the sort of realm of normal
revisions and
you see getting a lot of revisions
you're getting really big numbers and
forecasting
in that environment is really tough and
we still have a lot of uncertainty
around
the virus around the vaccine around the
unwind of government support
so i'm not too worried by the fact that
the government is having to update its
forecasts quite regularly and
actually i commend them uh to do that
because the economy itself is moving
really really quickly
look there are challenges ahead so this
is a good set of numbers we're ending
the year better than we
had hoped for um and better than many
other economies
but there are absolutely still
challenges for 2021. yeah
we're seeing this this cluster growing
in sydney
how detrimental would another round of
border closures be for the economy
uh very so our own research here at ey
shows that social distancing measures
are the most
impactful for the economy but the second
one to that is domestic border closures
so when we start
instigating widespread tightening of
social restrictions
and we close our domestic borders it has
a really big and immediate impact on the
economy
so we do need to watch this really
closely if we can keep domestic borders
open particularly over this holiday
period
that will deliver a better economic
outcome than if we have to close them
jim charmers the shadow treasurer was on
the program earlier he says there's
plenty the government could be doing to
help people
who are underemployed and unemployed
citing the government's industrial
relations reform will the overhaul
threaten
wages growth
i think wages growth is absolutely
challenged and it's one of the things we
haven't talked about very much wage
growth was weak
going into covid and now it's going to
be even weaker
in fact we think that real wages so that
is
uh wage growth less inflation could be
negative in the next year or two so that
will be a real headwind for households
um which means that not not just people
who are unemployed and
underemployed facing a headwind but even
those in secure employment so that is a
big challenge and
one of the question marks we had over
the forecast in the myifo today
so we do need to think about that
industrial relations reform does help
that
it improves the efficiency in the
economy it helps to drive
economic growth but it's also
politically tough and it takes time
politically tough and takes time is a
very good point uh obviously
the the massive levels of government
debt have been revised down
are you concerned though that some of
this the the outlook that we saw today
is just
too reliant on on high iron
oil prices that you know obviously that
is a very volatile situation with our
trade relationship with china on the
decline
not at all uh probably the opposite
actually the
treasury's forecast underlying uh their
economic assumptions are actually really
conservative
uh so in terms of iron ore they expect
iron ore to get back to 55 us dollars a
ton so that's
dropping by you know two-thirds uh by
september of next year
they had that uh for june uh in the
october budget so they've pushed it out
by one quarter but that's an incredibly
conservative forecast
uh so and that's appropriate i think
given the risk to the economy
they also had very conservative
forecasts in that they did not revise
their
um assumptions around the roll out of a
vaccine or their assumptions around
opening out international borders
and the flow through of that to net
overseas migration so
pretty conservative set of forecasts
that do still leave a little bit of
upside at least on those factors
for 2021. joe thank you so much for
joining us it's been a pleasure to have
you on the show
throughout this year and i'll speak to
you again next year my pleasure have a
good new year
that's ey oceania chief economist joe
masters who has been joining us
pretty regularly on this program to talk
about the various economic news and
clearly we have been
reporting on economic news out of the
covert led
recession many times throughout the year
and has been a very big year now
recapping
the main story the australian economy
has rebounded faster than
expected with treasury now forecasting
it will grow
in this financial year rather than
shrink the mid-year budget update which
was handed down today
forecast gdp will grow by 0.75
in 2020-21 now that's up from the
forecast in the october budget
which is about 10 weeks ago which
predicted the economy would contract by
1.5
soaring iron oil prices have also helped
reduce the size of the record deficit
too
thank you so much for watching afternoon
briefing today i'm patricia carvalhos
remember you can keep up to date
right here on the abc news channel my
colleagues will keep you up to date
throughout the evening i will be back
tomorrow at 4pm i'll catch you then
[Music]
nine eight this new year's eve the
parties are yours
stay home with the abc for the biggest
night of the year
[Music]
at 8 30 join rove for
and at nine charlie pickering and dan
rowe bring you australia's biggest stars
there's only one place to be this new
year's eve that's your place with the
abc
from 8 30 on abc and iview
[Music]
all right so let's all please bring our
a game
we're actually looking at the site of
one of the greatest crimes
of humanity depending on what character
i'm doing
it makes me more brave i've always
enjoyed people who
have beliefs that they're certain about
real
sincere belief is like rocket fuel
[Music]
yeah this is
it's more than just comedy abc tv plus
starts january 1. hunger
here we go intensity action
fascinating journeys with legends of
australian sport
streaming now on eye view
we've made to help stop the spread need
to continue into